Title: The Hunting of the Snark: An Agony in Eight Fits

Author: Lewis Carroll

Release date: June 25, 2008 [eBook #13]
                Most recently updated: July 3, 2025

Language: English

Credits: David Widger


                 Fit the First

                  THE LANDING


     “Just the place for a Snark!” the Bellman cried,
          As he landed his crew with care;
     Supporting each man on the top of the tide
          By a finger entwined in his hair.

     “Just the place for a Snark! I have said it twice:
          That alone should encourage the crew.
     Just the place for a Snark! I have said it thrice:
          What I tell you three times is true.”

     The crew was complete: it included a Boots--
          A maker of Bonnets and Hoods--
     A Barrister, brought to arrange their disputes--
          And a Broker, to value their goods.

     A Billiard-marker, whose skill was immense,
          Might perhaps have won more than his share--
     But a Banker, engaged at enormous expense,
          Had the whole of their cash in his care.

     There was also a Beaver, that paced on the deck,
          Or would sit making lace in the bow:
     And had often (the Bellman said) saved them from wreck,
          Though none of the sailors knew how.

     There was one who was famed for the number of things
          He forgot when he entered the ship:
     His umbrella, his watch, all his jewels and rings,
          And the clothes he had bought for the trip.

     He had forty-two boxes, all carefully packed,
          With his name painted clearly on each:
     But, since he omitted to mention the fact,
          They were all left behind on the beach.

     The loss of his clothes hardly mattered, because
          He had seven coats on when he came,
     With three pairs of boots--but the worst of it was,
          He had wholly forgotten his name.

     He would answer to “Hi!” or to any loud cry,
          Such as “Fry me!” or “Fritter my wig!”
      To “What-you-may-call-um!” or “What-was-his-name!”
           But especially “Thing-um-a-jig!”

     While, for those who preferred a more forcible word,
          He had different names from these:
     His intimate friends called him “Candle-ends,”
           And his enemies “Toasted-cheese.”

     “His form is ungainly--his intellect small--”
           (So the Bellman would often remark)
     “But his courage is perfect! And that, after all,
          Is the thing that one needs with a Snark.”

     He would joke with hyenas, returning their stare
          With an impudent wag of the head:
     And he once went a walk, paw-in-paw, with a bear,
          “Just to keep up its spirits,” he said.

     He came as a Baker: but owned, when too late--
          And it drove the poor Bellman half-mad--
     He could only bake Bridecake--for which, I may state,
          No materials were to be had.

     The last of the crew needs especial remark,
          Though he looked an incredible dunce:
     He had just one idea--but, that one being “Snark,”
           The good Bellman engaged him at once.

     He came as a Butcher: but gravely declared,
          When the ship had been sailing a week,
     He could only kill Beavers. The Bellman looked scared,
          And was almost too frightened to speak:

     But at length he explained, in a tremulous tone,
          There was only one Beaver on board;
     And that was a tame one he had of his own,
          Whose death would be deeply deplored.

     The Beaver, who happened to hear the remark,
          Protested, with tears in its eyes,
     That not even the rapture of hunting the Snark
          Could atone for that dismal surprise!

     It strongly advised that the Butcher should be
          Conveyed in a separate ship:
     But the Bellman declared that would never agree
          With the plans he had made for the trip:

     Navigation was always a difficult art,
          Though with only one ship and one bell:
     And he feared he must really decline, for his part,
          Undertaking another as well.

     The Beaver’s best course was, no doubt, to procure
          A second-hand dagger-proof coat--
     So the Baker advised it--and next, to insure
          Its life in some Office of note:

     This the Banker suggested, and offered for hire
          (On moderate terms), or for sale,
     Two excellent Policies, one Against Fire,
          And one Against Damage From Hail.

     Yet still, ever after that sorrowful day,
          Whenever the Butcher was by,
     The Beaver kept looking the opposite way,
          And appeared unaccountably shy.



                      Fit the Second

                   THE BELLMAN’S SPEECH


     The Bellman himself they all praised to the skies--
          Such a carriage, such ease and such grace!
     Such solemnity, too! One could see he was wise,
          The moment one looked in his face!

     He had bought a large map representing the sea,
          Without the least vestige of land:
     And the crew were much pleased when they found it to be
          A map they could all understand.

     “What’s the good of Mercator’s North Poles and Equators,
          Tropics, Zones, and Meridian Lines?”
      So the Bellman would cry: and the crew would reply
          “They are merely conventional signs!

     “Other maps are such shapes, with their islands and capes!
          But we’ve got our brave Captain to thank:”
      (So the crew would protest) “that he’s bought us the best--
          A perfect and absolute blank!”

     This was charming, no doubt; but they shortly found out
          That the Captain they trusted so well
     Had only one notion for crossing the ocean,
          And that was to tingle his bell.

     He was thoughtful and grave--but the orders he gave
          Were enough to bewilder a crew.
     When he cried “Steer to starboard, but keep her head larboard!”
           What on earth was the helmsman to do?

     Then the bowsprit got mixed with the rudder sometimes:
          A thing, as the Bellman remarked,
     That frequently happens in tropical climes,
          When a vessel is, so to speak, “snarked.”

     But the principal failing occurred in the sailing,
          And the Bellman, perplexed and distressed,
     Said he had hoped, at least, when the wind blew due East,
          That the ship would not travel due West!

     But the danger was past--they had landed at last,
          With their boxes, portmanteaus, and bags:
     Yet at first sight the crew were not pleased with the view,
          Which consisted of chasms and crags.

     The Bellman perceived that their spirits were low,
          And repeated in musical tone
     Some jokes he had kept for a season of woe--
          But the crew would do nothing but groan.

     He served out some grog with a liberal hand,
          And bade them sit down on the beach:
     And they could not but own that their Captain looked grand,
          As he stood and delivered his speech.

     “Friends, Romans, and countrymen, lend me your ears!”
           (They were all of them fond of quotations:
     So they drank to his health, and they gave him three cheers,
          While he served out additional rations).

     “We have sailed many months, we have sailed many weeks,
          (Four weeks to the month you may mark),
     But never as yet (’tis your Captain who speaks)
          Have we caught the least glimpse of a Snark!

     “We have sailed many weeks, we have sailed many days,
          (Seven days to the week I allow),
     But a Snark, on the which we might lovingly gaze,
          We have never beheld till now!

     “Come, listen, my men, while I tell you again
          The five unmistakable marks
     By which you may know, wheresoever you go,
          The warranted genuine Snarks.

     “Let us take them in order. The first is the taste,
          Which is meagre and hollow, but crisp:
     Like a coat that is rather too tight in the waist,
          With a flavour of Will-o’-the-wisp.

     “Its habit of getting up late you’ll agree
          That it carries too far, when I say
     That it frequently breakfasts at five-o’clock tea,
          And dines on the following day.

     “The third is its slowness in taking a jest.
          Should you happen to venture on one,
     It will sigh like a thing that is deeply distressed:
          And it always looks grave at a pun.

     “The fourth is its fondness for bathing-machines,
          Which is constantly carries about,
     And believes that they add to the beauty of scenes--
          A sentiment open to doubt.

     “The fifth is ambition. It next will be right
          To describe each particular batch:
     Distinguishing those that have feathers, and bite,
          And those that have whiskers, and scratch.

     “For, although common Snarks do no manner of harm,
          Yet, I feel it my duty to say,
     Some are Boojums--” The Bellman broke off in alarm,
          For the Baker had fainted away.
